Ancient Faith Radio presents Homilies from All Saints, taken from the weekly sermons by Father Patrick Henry Reardon, priest at All Saints Orthodox Church in Chicago, and senior editor of Touchstone Magazine.
Here's Father Pat.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.
We've finished today's Gospel, my God's insistence,
the second of the Markan prophecies of the Passion.
But I want to talk about this healing of the one who's described here as a boy, although I'm not at all convinced he is a boy because when the Father tells Jesus he's been like this since boyhood, it suggests he's older than that.
Jesus drives out
the demon.
And then he refers to the necessity of prayer and fasting.
All of these, of course, are Lenten themes.
In the ancient church, all during the Lent, exorcisms were done weekly, some cases daily.
over those who are about to be baptized.
We will do an exercise this morning, immediately following the sermon, those who are going to be baptized, at least those who are here.
This morning's drug story is a story about the struggle of faith.
Jesus regards the crisis in his story
to be directly related to faith.
He says in a great sense of exasperation, O faithless generation, what God says to the people in the desert, isn't it?
The 40 years wandering in the desert.
O faithless generation,
How long will I be with you?
Actually, it's not good to be very much longer.
How long shall I bear with you?
The faith is the central component in the conversation between Jesus and the father of the boy.
Before I go further with this,
I don't often give you visual age, called a sermon, but today I thought maybe I would.
Now that painting you have, he is in part a portrayal
of faith that painting is in the art gallery of the Vatican Museum.
Napoleon's army stole it and took it back to France in 1795.
It was finished in 1520.
It's the last of Raphael's paintings, the last one.
In fact, it's likely he didn't even put the finishing touches on.
It's likely someone else did.
He died rather early of age 37.
Some of you have had a chance to look at it.
Was there anything in there about this morning's sermon in there?
Today's Gospel is a story about faith.
The man says to Jesus, if you can do anything, have compassion on us and save us.
And Jesus said to him, if you can believe, all things are possible to him who believes.
The text goes on, immediately the father of the child cried out and said with tears, Lord, I believe, help my unbelief.
And there is a first feature to observe about faith in this text.
It's weakness.
You know, in most people,
Faith is mixed with strong components of unbelief, difficulties, and occasionally doubts.
It's probably most likely in contemporary society because a couple of centuries ago the history of philosophy
took a suicidal turn and began to encourage the cultivation of doubt.
One of the major features of so many schools of modern philosophy, the deliberate cultivation of doubt.
I likened it in a touchstone conference a few years ago
I likened it to modern philosophy.
To a snake who starts to eat its tail, and it keeps eating its tail, and it keeps eating its tail, and before long it's crunching on its own brain.
That strikes me as a just and fair metaphor for a great deal of the epistemological suicide.
much contemporary philosophy, the deliberate cultivation of doubt.
But even for those of us who don't cultivate doubt, for those who regard the cultivation of doubt as a species of putting a bullet in one's head, there are still days when faith is difficult.
Trials, tribulations, afflict the mind,
I'm not sure if he has any faith at all.
Indeed, that has so often been my own experience that I can't believe I'm alone in this.
There are days when even the most ardent and serious believer may wonder if he has any faith.
In Matthew's version of this story, in fact, not Mark's, which we had this morning, the evangelist
as Jesus saying about faith as a grain of mustard seed for every small little bit.
And yet Jesus assures us this much faith is sufficient to move mountains.
Those who have lived by faith know all about this.
The mountain is a very large and generally immovable problem.
In the course of our life in Christ, we will occasionally meet such mountains.
And they will seem impossible.
But they are no more immovable than Pharaoh's army was invincible.
Another important difference is this.
A mustard seed is alive and will grow and will thrive.
Mountains tend ever to remain the same.
Size, in short, is not of importance with respect to faith.
You know, rather seldom does Jesus reprimand his disciples in the gospel story.
It's very rare he does this.
But what he does is most often in connection with their weak faith.
How often he called them oligoplasty, you of little faith, oligoplasty.
The most striking place with the word appears, I believe, again in the Gospel of Matthew where Peter tries to walk on water, and it began to sink.
And Jesus says to him,
O you of little faith.
He fully expects us to walk on water.
And if we don't, that is his reprimand.
O you of little faith.
A second feature about faith, and it follows directly from the first, is the inevitability of it being tried
This we can be sure of with respect to faith.
It will be tested.
This is a principle illustrated in the cases of Abraham and Job.
Indeed, both of these men also exemplify a special way in which faith is tested.
Abraham and Job have this also in common.
They were tried through their children.
Joe, we recall, was disappointed with his children right from the beginning.
They're described as a bunch of party goers.
In fact, they have a party every day.
It means, look at that, it's almost like a Jane Austen novel.
You're either having a ball or you're preparing for the next one.
When I first read Jane Austen, that was my, did anybody here have a job?
That was my feeling when I read, oh, I don't want to knock Jane Austen.
Who's, I think, there's a person who is a sound philosopher.
She does not fall, she is a stoic.
She does not fall prey.
If you have a choice, always read Jane Austen for philosophy, not Nietzsche.
And we do have a choice.
But Job's children, Job's children partied all the time.
He was a sort of constant worry to him.
And you know what happens that all of them die in a single day.
When God had in mind to test the faith of Abraham, how did he test it?
Through his son, Isaac.
You know, it is arguable that he's our children that we are most vulnerable.
You know, our children belong to us, and yet they don't.
I think we learned that rather early, didn't we?
These were our children.
And yet, as long to God, I remember telling the Lord about that one time when they were very, very young, and I was quite distressed.
They were hardly more than infants at the time, and they were walking out under the stars.
You're telling the Lord, I know you gave up on me, but they're still yours.
Tell me how you figured that out.
Because it's very important I figured that out because I'm going to have them for a while.
I need to get that clear in my head.
Abraham,
in Job were likewise subject to that experience.
Children are linked with society and with history.
There's no wonder that they represent the challenge of faith because faith is intrinsically tied to society and to history.
It's significant, therefore, that the faith of the man in today's gospel
is tested in connection with his child.
You find this pattern all through Holy Scripture.
We recall the Shuninai night woman in 2 Kings 4.
We think on the sick child of the nobleman who approaches Jesus in John 4.
We consider the example of Jairus who brought to Jesus his anxiety about his daughter.
Here's the way Mark describes it.
And when he saw him, he felt at his feet and begged him earnestly saying, my little daughter lies at the point of death.
Come and lay your hands on her that she may be healed and she will live.
We weigh the example of the syrophoenician woman who came to Jesus worried and grieving for her sick daughter.
There are a thousand ways in which our faith may be tested for our children.
because it is through our children that we are most vulnerable.
But these are extreme examples.
And however it happens, we can depend on it.
Our faith will be tested.
And if we know we are being tested, we are far less likely to fail the test.
Now third, this testing of faith takes place in the valley, beneath the mountain of transfiguration.
The painting that you had a chance to look at is known as Raphael's Transfiguration, and yet slightly over half
of the area on that canvas.
It's not the mountain of transfiguration at all.
That's to the top.
Slightly over half of that painting describes the valley beneath.
What's going on in that valley beneath?
There's a little boy who's possessed of a demon
And everybody is all milling around and trying to figure out what to do about it, this chaos.
In Matthew and in Mark, in their gospel sequence, today's gospel takes place just as Jesus has come down from that mountain where the three apostles witnessed the transfiguration.
While he was being transfigured on the mountain,
The other apostles were down in the valley, vainly attempting to exercise the demon from that man's son.
There's contrast between these two scenes.
Now the painting has been variously interpreted.
I'm not sure what Jane Austen thought of it.
I've read all Jane Austen, but I don't recall the painting
being mentioned anywhere.
But I do know what Nietzsche thought of it.
Nietzsche interpreted this painting of Raphael in his book The Birth of Tragedy.
Nietzsche saw in this painting a depiction of the conflict between the Apollonian and the Dionysian principles.
principles of rationality and irrationality.
I believe this interpretation would have come as a bit of a surprise to Raphael.
If he had lived a few more hundred years, he could have read each and found out what his painting was about.
But he died at age 37 on Good Friday, April the 6th, 1520.
I don't think that painting is about the Apollonian and Dionysian principles in human experience.
It's about faith.
He's divided between these two scenes.
In the upper half, the peace and solemnity of the transfiguration.
And the scene of chaos and confusion at the bottom.
The top is full of light.
and darkness dominates the bottom.
That bottom, in fact, is one of the best, one of the absolute best of Raphael's use of Kuroskuro.
At the top, the apostles are sheeting their eyes from the divine splendor.
The apostles at the bottom are desperately trying to help the little boy, and they are clueless.
I noticed the one of them is even consulting a book.
He's got a book on his lap, gesticulating.
Now this last of Rothel's painting, my brothers and sisters, says a great deal about the experience of faith, namely that it is a valley experience.
All of us surely would prefer to be
in the top half of that painting.
Moses, Elijah, Peter, and James, and John.
I am not sure who the two little figures to the left are, but I'm suspecting they are Raphael and his friend De La Rovere.
I'm suspecting that since he kept sneaking them into all sorts of places where history doesn't testify they were.
But I think most of us, all of us really, would rather be on the top, wouldn't we?
shielding our eyes from the divine glory, up with Jesus, transfigured, the vision of light.
Yeah, we don't have that experience very often.
Most of the time we're in the valley.
It is in the bottom half of the painting that we find ourselves, the dark valley, where the Bible calls the valley of the shadow of death.
You see, there, there is what we make progress in faith.
And the slightest effort given while we're in the valley, even though it seems so pitiful, a grain of mustard seed, the slightest effort we make while we're in the valley is what counts.
We believe what really counts is when we're on the mountaintop, transfused with a lighted table,
And we wonder why it doesn't happen more often.
We don't often make progress on the mountaintop.
I need to tell you this.
We do not often make progress on the mountaintop.
We make progress in the valley where even the slightest bit of faith transforms our lives.
Here's the place where faith is put to the test and children are healed.
Homilies from All Saints with Father Pat Reardon, pastor of All Saints Orthodox Church in Chicago and senior editor of Touchstone Magazine.
This has been a presentation of Ancient Faith Radio.